Building and extending the sprites

Each PNG in app/sprites is a transparent 32x32 export. The source artwork and
full image-generation prompt are recorded in manifest.json. New artwork should
be created separately and exported using nearest-neighbour sampling,
transparent padding to 32x32 and a small palette without dithering.

Run npm run build:sprites after changing an export, its manifest entry, semantic
regions, or app/sprites/renderer.js. ImageMagick is needed for this development
step. Set SPRITE_MAGICK to its path if it is not available as magick.
The build updates app/sprites/data.js, the atlas, hashes, and the marked block
inside paultendo-mod.js. Commit the source changes and rebuilt output together.
Run npm run check and npm test. Open /app/sprites/lab.html with the local server
to compare actual-size and enlarged sprites on dark and light backgrounds.

Semantic regions

Each palette entry has its original colour, a role and a shade from 0 to 3.
Manifest roles are keyed by lowercase RGB hex. Rectangular region annotations
can refine a surface independently of its palette colour. They do not paint
new pixels or alter outlines or transparency.

outline: fixed silhouette, excluded from recolouring and condition overlays
body: recoloured by the material ramp; accepts condition overlays
accent: recoloured by the decoration ramp; accepts condition overlays
surface: fixed material colour; accepts wear and cracks, such as glass
fixed: protected feature, such as a needle, reflection or lettering

No colours are changed when an option is omitted. The darkest visible palette
entry defaults to outline. Other unannotated entries default to body. For a
multi-material object, mark secondary materials as fixed or surface. Keep a
reflection or dial marking fixed while allowing its surrounding glass to crack.

Overlays use the same 32x32 index grid. The order is wear, cracks, repairs. They
are clipped against the base sprite's semantic regions, never the rectangular
image bounds alone. Repair bindings appear on frames and bodies, not glass.
An asset may supply overlayOffsets, keyed by condition with integer x and y
positions. This lets the same overlay fit a narrow tool or a wide object.
Placement never changes clipping or lets a mark spill beyond the silhouette.
Unknown sprites return null, so callers can keep their text-only fallback.
Unknown palette names and condition marks are ignored. The cache holds at most
128 variants and never belongs in a game save.

Public API

PaultendoSprites.render('compass', {
    material: 'steel', accent: 'sea', overlays: ['worn', 'cracked']
})

This returns a self-contained image data URI. Use a text label beside it and
image-rendering: pixelated at integer scales. Materials and accent ramps can be
extended in renderer.js without duplicating sprite artwork.
PaultendoSprites.artifactAppearance(object) reads an object's persistent look.

Game integration

Crafted objects use their actual input material and retain a decoration chosen
deterministically from their lineage. Ownership and world changes do not choose
a new palette. The look is saved at creation and carried in Traveler memory.
Existing objects derive a compatible look from their recorded provenance.
Earlier passages add wear. Broken objects show cracks. Field and carving tools
show wear from their existing durability, not from idle days or random rolls.
The repair overlay is available to authored appearance records and the renderer;
this art change does not add a repair action or simulate a new repair system.

The original R74n icons stay in icons/ and use their existing licence. New art,
its source artwork, renderer, build scripts and provenance stay separate.
