HEADLESS CAMPAIGN HARNESS

Run the real vendored GenTown engine and paultendo mod for hundreds or thousands
of turns. No browser is needed and no live player save is read or changed.

Quick start (Node.js 22 or newer, after npm ci)

  npm run simulate -- --days 1000

Compare the same generated terrain under different decision policies

  npm run simulate -- --days 1000 --seeds 7,42,123 --policies yes,mixed,skip

Continue an exported save in an isolated simulation

  npm run simulate -- --save /path/to/world.planet --days 500 --policy mixed

Inspect a harsher founding location

  npm run simulate -- --days 500 --seed 42 --site first

Default founding chooses temperate grassland if the generated terrain has it.
The report records the selected coordinates and biome. It gives no technology,
people or resources beyond what the native founding action supplies. 'first'
uses the first habitable chunk in engine order, which may be snow or desert.
An imported world keeps its towns and starting day and is not settled again.

Policies

  yes    Accept live Yes/No proposals and use the first offered choice.
  no     Reject live Yes/No proposals and use the last offered choice.
  mixed  Choose using a separate seeded random stream.
  skip   Leave ordinary proposals unanswered. Advancing invokes the engine's
         actual skip or fallback behaviour, which differs between events.

These are diagnostic policies, not models of skilled or typical players. Naming
prompts submit the native suggestion, including its editable preview. Missing
suggestions receive a deterministic name. Mandatory letters are read through
their actual Read controls. A world which has taken control from the player
continues to use native autonomous decisions. No costs or checks are bypassed.

What runs

The actual nextDay wrapper, daily events, weighted random events, unfinished
choices, native skip handlers, mod follow-ups and inactive reached worlds run.
Canvas operations are stubbed because there is no display. UI and live choice
handlers still execute. A virtual clock runs deferred callbacks immediately
within simulated time, without sleeping for the game's real-time button delay.
Every turn advances the virtual clock by one second. Seeded IDs and timestamps
make a new campaign reproducible along with its simulation and policy seeds.

Reproducibility requires identical source hashes, inputs and arguments. Running
a different policy changes consequences and later random event eligibility.
Imported exports do not contain the engine's complete random stream or every
pending callback. They begin a new seeded continuation, not an exact replay of
the original session. Reproduce a failure from its original input and seed.

Output

The runner prints its output directory. By default it creates a unique directory
under the system temporary directory. --out selects a NEW directory and refuses
to overwrite one that already exists. Put long-lived runs somewhere permanent.

  batch.json / batch.txt       Configuration and a comparison of completed runs
  input.planet                Copy of the supplied input, when importing
  seed-N-policy/report.json   Metrics, source hashes, snapshots and failure detail
  seed-N-policy/report.txt    Human-readable campaign summary
  seed-N-policy/timeline.jsonl Actual news, choices, discoveries and work changes
  seed-N-policy/initial.planet World after founding or importing
  seed-N-policy/day-N.planet  Checkpoint exports (every 100 turns by default)
  seed-N-policy/final.planet  Last state, including after a runtime failure

Open any exported world through the game's Saves import to inspect its map,
towns and history. This is a separate simulation. Importing it into your own
play session replaces that session, so use a separate browser profile or save
first if you want to retain your playthrough.

Checks and metrics

Each existing active or inactive world must advance exactly one day per turn.
Every registered town is checked for finite population, wealth, stores and jobs.
Negative people, occupations or physical goods fail the run. Cash debt is allowed.
Console errors, warnings and thrown exceptions fail the run. The report and last
world are retained if export is still possible. Ctrl+C writes the current partial
result and stops the batch, rather than discarding it.

The runner records population, food, jobs, wealth, hunger, unrest, actual local
knowledge, research, workshop work, artifact work, sampling, voyages, exchanges,
teachings, encounters, places, clues and process types. The report counts only
real unlock-tree thresholds as discoveries. Small legacy technology score gains
remain in snapshots and do not inflate the discovery count.

Unfinished work includes its actual status and obstacle. --stall-after N flags
work with no change in status, remaining work, obstacle or resolution for N days
(default 30). This is a diagnostic threshold, not a deadline for the game. It can
include legitimate shortages and waits. A lack of progress is not itself a crash.

The longest quiet stretch counts days without a tracked discovery, change of
work status or obstacle, town count, artifact, place, encounter, clue or process
count. Routine news and population changes do not reset it. A town dying out is
recorded, but the world continues for the requested number of turns. Long quiet
periods after extinction are therefore visible rather than hidden by early exits.

An event which requests input but has no message or live controls is recorded as
an unavailable choice. The runner leaves it to lapse rather than inventing an
answer. Such a campaign finishes with ISSUES. Runtime failures finish with FAILED.
PASSED means the configured checks found no fault, not that the game is balanced.
Exit status is 0 for all PASSED, 1 for ISSUES or FAILED, and 130 when interrupted.

The harness cannot decide whether the pacing is enjoyable, whether a headline is
convincing or whether a player understands a decision. It supplies reproducible
campaign evidence for those finishing passes and complements human playtesting.

Options

  npm run simulate -- --help

Normal regression tests keep their existing real-timer boot behaviour. Harness
regressions are in tests/campaign-harness.test.mjs and use the same shared game
bootstrap as the rest of the suite.
